---
layout: basic
title: Pandora
permalink: /bitcoin/stacks/pandora
---

Pandora enables property-based testing, fuzzing, and invariant testing for smart contracts that run on the Stacks 2.x layer-1 blockchain.

Clarity is the language for writing smart contracts that run on the Stacks 2.x layer-1 blockchain that connects to Bitcoin for security and enables decentralized apps and predictable smart contracts.

Pandora can discover and run tests written in Clarity. It is also backwards compatible and can run Hiro's Clarinet tests written in TypeScript and JavaScript.

## Why

1. Nearly [$3 billion](https://www.coindesk.com/layer2/2022/11/03/with-hacks-at-a-record-high-crypto-needs-to-find-better-ways-to-keep-users-safe/)[^1] has been lost to protocol exploits in 2022, more than double 2021's total. Most of the protocols have been audited, from the high level, but how good enough were tested?

2. Property-based testing, fuzzing, and invariant testing are well-established techniques for testing the hard stuff and staying sane. dapp.tools and forge on Ethereum follow the same strategy.

3. Clarity features _LISP-like_ syntax. Having the option to write tests in Clarity helps you minimize context switching and focus on what matters.

## Articles

If you are building on the Stacks 2.x layer-1 blockchain and you are trying to find ways to improve your testing structure, you may benefit from the upcoming article series:

* Pandora - Part 1
* Pandora - Part 2
* Pandora - Part 3
* Pandora - Part 4
* Pandora - Part 5
* Pandora - Part 6
* Pandora - Part 7

## Prerequisites

Node.js and Deno is required for managing Clarity contracts and running tests. Basic knowledge of Clarity, and property-based testing, is assumed. Feel free to contact me if you need help with those.

## Feedback
The ideas presented in the Pandora article series have their origins in a variety of well-established testing tools:

QuickCheck, Hedgehog, AutoFixture, Hypothesis, fast-check, all from the perspective of my open-source contributions to those, through the past decade, and by actually using those tools at work.

However, don't consider that as an indication that I'm always right. I welcome feedback on any article.

## About the name
<blockquote>“Pandora was the first human woman in Greek mythology, created by the gods for the express purpose of punishing mortals. The gods entrusted Pandora with a jar containing all the evils of the cosmos for her to unleash upon mankind.”
  <br>
  <em>--https://mythopedia.com/topics/pandora</em>
</blockquote>

<div>---</div>

[^1]: <small>This excludes FTX's $8 billion collapse, which is another story.</small>
